
Subject: EEE5T03 Engineering Ethics and Academic Integrity


Case Study and Reflective Writing


A. Case study
Students are required to make a thorough study on an ethics case with topics from the list below:
Research misconduct
Violation of codes of ethics of engineers
Unethical use of human and animal subjects in research or engineering project
Dishonest use of information technology in research or engineering project
Unethical collaboration in research or engineering project
Whistleblowing of wrongdoing
Unethical publication of research or engineering project results
Infringement of intellectual property right
Unethical use of AI and data in research or engineering projects
Race, disability, and age discrimination in engineering workplace

Students cannot select the cases that have been mentioned in the classes and should try their best to consider the cases related to their own study discipline.   
  

B. Submission
Report (1000 words)
Part A – Students should prepare a report with suitable illustrations to describe the details of the case. They include (1) the background of the case, (2) the ethical principles that were ignored, and (3) the harm that could be or was caused at individual, professional, business, and societal levels. References should be provided to allow verification of the case.
Part B – Students should play the role of the main character in the case and make use of the 7-step guide in ethical decision-making as discussed in the class to make better decisions for the character. When discussing the ethical tests in Step 5, students should not just give the test results but also clearly explain the rationale of the test results. Students are also reminded to make a detailed review in Step 7 and suggest solutions to prevent the same problem from happening again.
The report must be written in English and in MSWord or PDF format.

Presentation video
Based on the report, students should prepare a presentation video of about 15 minutes. The video should be a summary of the report. It should be a record of the live presentation of the student. The video should be in the mp4 format (you may record it using Zoom). It should show the PowerPoint slides that the student prepares to assist the presentation. The face of the student should appear throughout the whole video. The presentation must be in English.






C. Assessment criteria 
The general criteria for assessing this case study include:
The completeness of the materials with respect to the requirements as listed above 
The written and oral presentation skills


D. Using AI in report writing 
For Part A, students are allowed to use AI to assist in information collection and report writing. However, students are reminded to clearly indicate in the report that AI has been used and they have the responsibility to verify the correctness of the information provided by AI. For Part B, it should be written by the student. Using AI to generate this part will be considered plagiarism.  


E. Rubrics
Essay




Video Presentation


